---
slug: pre-compiling
sidebar_position: 5
description: With pre-compilation, Violet apps naturally become multiplatform and can run smoothly on different operating systems including Windows, Linux, macOS and more.
---

# Pre-Compiling

Traditionally, software programs are distributed as binaries specific to a particular
platform, such as Windows, Linux, macOS, and to a particular architecture, such as x86 or
ARM. This can lead to limited availability and compatibility for users on different
systems.

To meet chis challenge and provide a more stable and secure environment for native programs, Violet offers a approach. In this approach, Violet applications are distributed as Violet Pre-compiled Programs (VPP) using a special low-level language called Rosa.

## How Does Pre-Compilation Work?

Rosa represents the foundation of Violet's pre-compilation process. It involves compressing very low-level source files already created on the machine where the application will run.

### Multi-Platform and Multi-Compatibility

With pre-compilation, Violet apps naturally become multiplatform and can run smoothly on
different operating systems including Windows, Linux, macOS and more.

### Optimized Apps

Precompiled Violet apps are specifically optimized for the target machine they will run
on. This optimization allows programs to take full advantage of the system's
capabilities, resulting in improved performance and efficiency. By adapting the
application to the target architecture, Violet enables users to get the best possible
performance on their machines.

### Efficient Build Process

Despite advanced optimizations applied during pre-compile, Violet maintains an efficient
build process. VPP files can be compiled quickly, allowing users to install and run
applications without significant delays or long wait times.

## Compatibility with non-Violet Operating Systems

Being a multiplatform technology, Rosa can also be run on non-Violet operating systems
using a lightweight wrapper provided by Violet. Available for download from Violet's
website, this wrapper allows users to run Violet apps on their preferred platforms, even
if those platforms are not natively supported by Violet.

While Rosa itself is multiplatform, it's important to note that Violet apps take
advantage of the unique and ultra-beautiful features of the Violet ecosystem. As a
result, running these applications on non-Violet operating systems requires installing
the full package provided by Violet. This allows users to fully experience the rich
capabilities and seamless integration that the Violet platform has to offer.

Note: As Violet continues to evolve, updates and improvements may be made available
during the pre-build process and in the Rosa language. Stay connected with the Violet
community and visit the official website for the latest developments and updates.
